---
layout: post
title: The Set of All Languages is Uncountable
excerpt: Proof that the set of languages over a finite alphabet is uncountable.
proof_id: 40
lecture_link: https://www.udacity.com/course/viewer#!/c-ud557/l-1719018606/m-1714768615
theorem: The set of languages over a finite alphabet is uncountable.
method: (By contradiction) <span class="comment">/* Optionally specify that this proof is by contradiction.*/</span>
---

In order to obtain a contradiction, assume that the set of languages is countable. <span class="comment">/* It is a property of countable sets that they can be enumerated in a list, so it is sufficient to construct a language that differs from every item in that list. Since languages are sets, a language that differs by at least one string from every other language in the list must not be in the list.*/</span> Also recall that the [set of strings over a finite alphabet is countable]({% post_url 2015-12-30-0010-Countability1 %}). Construct a table using the list of languages as the rows and the list of strings as the columns, and fill in each cell \\( i, j \\) with a \\( 1 \\) if string \\( j \\) is a member of language \\( i \\), and \\( 0 \\) otherwise. <span class="comment">/* The rows of the table illustrate which strings are members of each language using an [indicator function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indicator_function), which is sometimes a useful alternative representation scheme. Note that the table below is filled in with completely arbitrary rows to illustrate the proof. Any unique entries for each row would work just as well.*/</span>

$$
\begin{array}{c|lcr}
{} & s_1 & s_2 & s_3 & s_4 & ... \\ \hline
L_1 & 1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & ... \\
L_2 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 1 & ... \\
L_3 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & ... \\
\vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \vdots \\
L_i & 1 & 1 & 0 & 1 & ... \\
\vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \ddots \\
\end{array}
$$

Now define a language \\( L_D = \\{ s_i : s_i \notin L_i \\} \\)<span class="comment"> /* in English, this says that the \\( i^{th} \\) string is in \\( L_D \\) if that string is not in the \\( i^{th} \\) language*/</span>. For the table above, \\( L_D = \\{ 0, 1, 1, ... \\} \\). Starting from the first row of the table, observe that \\( L_D \\) is not the same as the language \\( L_1 \\)<span class="comment"> /*by definition, a language is a set of strings, so two languages are the same if they represent the same set (i.e., if they contain all of the same strings), and they are different if they differ by at least one string as an element*/</span> because \\( s_1 \in L_1 \\) but \\( s_1 \notin L_D \\). In general, by the definition of \\( L_D \\), if \\( s_i \in L_i \\) then \\( s_i \notin L_i \\), and if \\( s_i \notin L_i \\) then \\( s_i \in L_D \\), so \\( L_D \neq L_i \\) for every row \\( i \\) in the table because \\( L_D \\) and \\( L_i \\) will always differ by at least the one string on the diagonal. <span class="comment">/* This technique is known as [Cantor's Diagonal Argument](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cantor%27s_diagonal_argument). In general, a diagonal argument is made by defining a set that differs from each of the source sets by at least one element.*/</span>

According to the assumption that the set of languages is countable, the rows of the table should contain every possible language, but \\( L_D \\) is not included in the rows of the table. This is a contradiction, so the assumption that the set of languages is countable must be wrong, and the set of languages must be uncountable.

QED

<span class="comment">/* One confusing aspect of this proof is a subtle difference between strings and languages. All strings are finite by definition, while languages can contain an infinite number of strings. As an example of this difference, consider that we can select a language as "the set of all words with an even number of characters". Clearly the language is an infinite set because there are an infinite number of words with an even number of characters (for any word of a given length we can obtain a word of even length by concatenating the word with itself: '0'->'00', '010'->'010010', etc.; so because there are an infinite number of words, there are also an infinite number of even-length words), and yet every string with an even number of characters only has a finite number of characters. It is this distinction that results in the difference between the set of strings being countable and the set of languages being uncountable.*/</span>