---
layout: post
title: Strings Over a Finite Alphabet
excerpt: Proof that the set of strings over a finite alphabet is countable.
proof_id: 10
lecture_link: https://www.udacity.com/course/viewer#!/c-ud557/l-1719018606/m-1814528654 
theorem: For any finite alphabet \( \Sigma \), the set of strings \( \Sigma^* \) is countable.
method: <span class="comment">/* Declining to specify a method of proof implies that it is a direct proof.*/</span>
---

<span class="comment">Starting from the definition of a countable set, the claim can be stated as an assertion of existence: "there must exist a one-to-one correspondence between the [natural numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_number) and the set of all strings that can be made from a finite alphabet". Like all existence proofs, providing an example of the object (a [bijection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bijection,_injection_and_surjection) in this case) is sufficient for direct proof, since that proves the object exists.</span>

By definition, a set is countable if it can be put in one-to-one correspondence with the natural numbers. Thus, a sufficient argument to prove the claim is to show an example of a one-to-one correspondence between the set of strings over a finite alphabet and the natural numbers.

According to the definition of the [kleene star](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kleene_star), the set of all strings can be partitioned into subsets according to length. (See lecture: [Operations on Languages](https://www.udacity.com/course/viewer#!/c-ud557/l-1719018606/m-4909409536))

$$\Sigma^* = \bigcup_{n=0}^{\infty} \Sigma^n$$

<span class="comment">This definition means that \\( \Sigma^* \\) is the set of all strings that can be made by concatenating any combination of letters from the alphabet \\( \Sigma \\), which is equivalent to the union of all strings of each length \\( 1, 2, 3, ..., etc. \\) Note that we can write $$\Sigma^*$$ as a union this way because every string is finite (by definition), so this contains all possible strings.</span>

For an alphabet with $$k$$ characters, there are $$k^n$$ words of length $$n$$.  Without the loss of generality, consider an alphabet with \\( k = 2 \\), \\( \Sigma= \\{ "0", "1" \\} \\) (the symbols of the alphabet are arbitrary, and any other finite alphabet with more symbols will simply have a larger \\(k\\)), and define a one-to-one correspondence between the elements in each subset of strings and the next \\( 2^n \\) natural numbers.

<span class="comment">The number of words for a given alphabet can be easily verified by recognizing that each character in a string can take on one of $$k$$ values, so for $$n$$ characters there must be $$k^n$$ possible strings.</span>

\\( \\{ 1 \\} \rightarrow \\{ \varepsilon \\} \\)  <span class="comment">/* Recall that \\( \varepsilon \\) is the empty string.*/</span><br>
\\( \\{ 2,3 \\} \rightarrow \\{ "0", "1" \\} \\)<br>
\\( \\{ 4,5,6,7 \\} \rightarrow \\{ "00", "01", "10", "11" \\} \\)<br>
\\( ... \\)<br>
\\( \\{ 2^n,..., 2^{n+1}-1 \\} \rightarrow \\{ "000...0", ..., "111...1" \\} \\)

The order within each subset of strings doesn't matter as long as there is only one natural number for each substring, so choosing [lexicographic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexicographical_order) (alphabetical) order is sufficient to complete the correspondence. 

<span class="comment">The proof is complete because we have shown an example of a one-to-one correspondence between strings over a finite alphabet and the natural numbers.</span>

QED
